Part 2 blog post of "porting USB applications to the web" (#7228)
GoogleChrome/web.dev: src/site/content/en/blog/porting-gphoto2-to-the-web/index.md

---
title: 'Porting USB applications to the web. Part 2: gPhoto2'
subhead: Learn how gPhoto2 was ported to WebAssembly to control external cameras over USB from a web app.
description: Learn how gPhoto2 was ported to WebAssembly to control external cameras over USB from a web app.
date: 2022-01-30
hero: image/9oK23mr86lhFOwKaoYZ4EySNFp02/MR4YGRvl0Z9AWT6vv3sQ.jpg

> alt: A picture of DSLR camera connected via a USB cable to a laptop. The laptop is running the Web demo mentioned in the article, which mirrors a live video feed from the camera as well as allows to tweak its settings via form controls.

Author: Why "allowing tweaking"? This is a continuation of "which mirrors [...] as well as allows to tweak".

> alt: A picture of DSLR camera connected via a USB cable to a laptop. The laptop is running the Web demo mentioned in the article, which mirrors a live video feed from the camera as well as allows to tweak its settings via form controls.

Reviewer: I messed up.

- Even if the `dlopen()` itself is implemented, there's no way to enumerate all dynamic libraries in a certain folder on the web, because most HTTP servers don't expose directory listings for security reasons.
- Linking dynamic libraries on the command line instead of enumerating in runtime can also lead to problems, such as the [duplicate symbols issue](https://github.com/emscripten-core/emscripten/issues/11985), that are caused by differences between representation of shared libraries in Emscripten and on other platforms.

It's possible to adapt the build system to those differences and hardcode the list of dynamic plugins somewhere during the build, but an even easier way to solve all those issues is to avoid dynamic linking to begin with.

> Turns out, libtool abstracts away various [dynamic linking methods](https://www.gnu.org/software/libtool/manual/html_node/Module-loaders-for-libltdl.html) on different platforms, and even supports writing custom loaders for others. One of the built-in methods it supports is called ["Dlpreopening"](https://www.gnu.org/software/libtool/manual/html_node/Dlpreopening.html):

Author: This shouldn't be marked as code or use `()`, because it's not a name of a function or an API.

> Turns out, libtool abstracts away various [dynamic linking methods](https://www.gnu.org/software/libtool/manual/html_node/Module-loaders-for-libltdl.html) on different platforms, and even supports writing custom loaders for others. One of the built-in methods it supports is called ["Dlpreopening"](https://www.gnu.org/software/libtool/manual/html_node/Dlpreopening.html):

Reviewer: >One of the built-in methods it supports

Then what is it? The sentence literally says its a method. Maybe "one of the built-in features".

> Turns out, libtool abstracts away various [dynamic linking methods](https://www.gnu.org/software/libtool/manual/html_node/Module-loaders-for-libltdl.html) on different platforms, and even supports writing custom loaders for others. One of the built-in methods it supports is called ["Dlpreopening"](https://www.gnu.org/software/libtool/manual/html_node/Dlpreopening.html):

Author: Does that work or should I replace "various dynamic linking methods" in the previous sentence too?

> **“Libtool provides special support for dlopening libtool object and libtool library files, so that their symbols can be resolved even on platforms without any dlopen and dlsym functions.  

Author: Not sure how to add newlines in here. The standard Markdown method of adding two spaces at the end of the line doesn't seem to work in 11ty, judging by preview.

@jpmedley do you have ideas?

Author: Oh, perhaps when I was looking last the rendering wasn't updated to the latest version yet (the one with two spaces in the end of the line).

Here's what the updated dependency diagram looks like with everything linked statically together:

{% Img src="image/9oK23mr86lhFOwKaoYZ4EySNFp02/5Fg5aJnydnIVMn44fiBE.svg", alt="A diagram shows 'the app' depending on 'libgphoto2 fork', which depends on 'libtool'. 'libtool' depends on 'ports: libusb1' and 'camlibs: libptp2'. 'ports: libusb1' depends on the 'libusb fork'.", width="800", height="481" %}

So that's what I hardcoded for Emscripten builds:

```c/2-4
LTDL_SET_PRELOADED_SYMBOLS();
lt_dlinit ();
#ifdef __EMSCRIPTEN__
  result = foreach_func("libusb1", list);
#else
  lt_dladdsearchdir (iolibs);
  result = lt_dlforeachfile (iolibs, foreach_func, list);
#endif
lt_dlexit ();
```

and

```c/2-4
LTDL_SET_PRELOADED_SYMBOLS();
lt_dlinit ();
#ifdef __EMSCRIPTEN__
  ret = foreach_func("libptp2", &foreach_data);
#else
  lt_dladdsearchdir (dir);
  ret = lt_dlforeachfile (dir, foreach_func, &foreach_data);
#endif
lt_dlexit ();
```

> In the autoconf build system, I now had to add `-dlpreopen` with both of those files as link flags for all executables (examples, tests and my own demo app), like this:

Author: > Is this the definition of 'all executables'?

Yes.

#define gp_port_library_operations libusb1_LTX_gp_port_library_operations

#include <gphoto2/gphoto2-port-library.h>
// …
```

This naming scheme also prevents name clashes in case I decide to link camera-specific plugins in the same app in the future.

After all these changes were implemented, I could build the test application and load the plugins successfully.

## Generating the settings UI

gPhoto2 allows camera libraries to define their own settings in a form of widget tree. The hierarchy of [widget types](http://www.gphoto.org/doc/api/gphoto2-widget_8h.html#a8c7e7c5b04d992022d9a821a0d3f9c30) consists of:

- Window - top-level configuration container
  - Sections - named groups of other widgets
    - Button fields
    - Text fields
    - Numeric fields
    - Date fields
    - Toggles
    - Radio buttons

The name, type, children and all the other relevant properties of each widget can be queried (and, in case of values, also modified) via the [exposed C API](http://www.gphoto.org/doc/api/gphoto2-widget_8h.html). Together, they provide a foundation for automatically generating settings UI in any language that can interact with C.

> Settings can be changed either via gPhoto2, or on the camera itself at any point in time. Additionally, some widgets can be readonly, and even the readonly state itself depends on the camera mode and other settings. For example, [shutter speed](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shutter_speed) is a writable numeric field in [M (manual mode)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digital_camera_modes#:~:text=an%20ISO%20sensitivity).-,M%3A%20Manual%20mode,-both%20shutter%20speed), but becomes an informational readonly field in [P (program mode)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digital_camera_modes#:~:text=abbreviated%20%22PASM%22%2C%20are%3A-,P%3A%20Program%20mode,-has%20the%20camera). In P mode, the value of shutter speed will also be dynamic and continuously changing depending on the brightness of the scene the camera is looking at.

Author: "M", "P" etc. are the actual names of modes on the camera dial and the way they're usually called in speech ("M mode", "P mode" etc.).

I'm providing a human-readable name in parentheses for those unfamiliar with digital cameras, but I don't want to omit the commonly used abbreviations for those who are.

Like the official tools, gPhoto2 [supports](http://www.gphoto.org/doc/remote/#:~:text=Using%20as%20webcam%20/%20video%20conferencing%20camera) streaming video from the camera to a locally stored file or directly to a virtual webcam too. I wanted to use that feature to provide a live view in my demo. However, while it's available in the console utility, I couldn't find it anywhere in the libgphoto2 library APIs.

Only after looking at the source code of the corresponding function in the console utility, I found out that it's not actually getting a video at all, but instead [keeps retrieving camera's preview](https://github.com/gphoto/gphoto2/blob/e9ad2a460990afec3d09033000642297b16d8950/gphoto2/actions.c#L1068-L1070) as individual JPEG images in an endless loop, and writing them out one by one so that they form an [M-JPEG](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Motion_JPEG) stream:

```c
while (1) {
  const char *mime;
  r = gp_camera_capture_preview (p->camera, file, p->context);
  // …
```

> I was very surprised that this approach works efficiently enough to get an impression of smooth realtime video. I was even more skeptical about being able to match the same performance in the web application too, with all the extra abstractions and Asyncify in the way. However, I decided to try anyway.

Author: Thanks, good point. Either astonished or astounded works in this context.

```suggestion
I was astonished that this approach works efficiently enough to get an impression of smooth realtime video. I was even more skeptical about being able to match the same performance in the web application too, with all the extra abstractions and Asyncify in the way. However, I decided to try anyway.
```

> On the C++ side I exposed a method `capturePreviewAsBlob` that invokes the same `gp_camera_capture_preview` function, and converts the resulting in-memory file to a [`Blob`](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/Blob) that can be passed to other web APIs more easily:

Author: Updated the suggestion to add `()` after `gp_camera_capture_preview` too.

    auto params = blob_chunks_and_opts(file);
    return Blob.new_(std::move(params.first), std::move(params.second));
  });
}
```

On the JavaScript side, I have a loop, similar to the one in gPhoto2, that keeps retrieving preview images as `Blob`s, decodes them in the background with [`createImageBitmap`](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/createImageBitmap) and [transfers](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/ImageBitmapRenderingContext/transferFromImageBitmap) them to the canvas on the next animation frame:

```js
while (this.canvasRef.current) {
  try {
    let blob = await this.props.getPreview();

    let img = await createImageBitmap(blob, { /* … */ });
    await new Promise(resolve => requestAnimationFrame(resolve));
    canvasCtx.transferFromImageBitmap(img);
  } catch (err) {
    // …
  }
}
```

Using those modern APIs ensures that all of the decoding work is done in the background, and the canvas gets updated only when both the image and the browser are fully prepared for drawing. This achieved consistent 30+ FPS on my laptop, which matched the native performance of both gPhoto2 and the official Sony software.

## Synchronizing the USB access

> When a USB data transfer is requested while another operation is already in progress, it will commonly result in a "device is busy" error. Since the preview and the settings UI update regularly, and the user might be trying to capture an image or modify settings at the same time, such conflicts between different operations turned out to be very frequent.

Author: I'm not sure which one to choose in this particular case. "frequent" is still the best match, because it's almost literally talking about "frequency" (as in, number of "something" per second). I could replace "very" with "highly" if that helps?

> When a USB data transfer is requested while another operation is already in progress, it will commonly result in a "device is busy" error. Since the preview and the settings UI update regularly, and the user might be trying to capture an image or modify settings at the same time, such conflicts between different operations turned out to be very frequent.

Reviewer: I'll resolve this one. Try to be careful of using the phrase 'very _something_'. It's overused and as I've said, there are precise verbs available.

In order to avoid them, I needed to synchronize all the accesses within the application. For that, I've built a promise-based async queue:

```js
let context = await new Module.Context();

let queue = Promise.resolve();

function schedule(op) {
  let res = queue.then(() => op(context));
  queue = res.catch(rethrowIfCritical);
  return res;
}
```

> By chaining each operation in a `.then` callback of the existing `queue` promise, and storing the chained result as the new value of `queue`, I can make sure that all operations are executed one by one, in order and without overlaps.

Author: Sigh, a mistake I keep making.

Any operation errors are returned to the caller, while critical (unexpected) errors mark the entire chain as a rejected promise, and ensure that no new operation will be scheduled afterwards.

By keeping the module context in a private (non-exported) variable, I'm minimizing the risks of accessing the `context` by accident somewhere else in the app without going through the `schedule` call.

To tie things together, now each access to the device context has to be wrapped in a `schedule` call like this:

```js
let config = await this.connection.schedule((context) => context.configToJS());
```

and

```js
this.connection.schedule((context) => context.captureImageAsFile());
```

After that, all the operations were executing successfully without conflicts.

## Conclusion

> Together, WebAssembly, Asyncify and Fugu APIs provide a very powerful compilation target for even the most complex applications. They allow you to take a library or an application previously built for a single platform, and port it to the web, making it available to a vastly larger number of users across desktop and mobile devices alike.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Together, WebAssembly, Asyncify, and Fugu APIs provide a very powerful compilation target for even the most complex applications. They allow you to take a library or an application previously built for a single platform, and port it to the web, making it available to a vastly larger number of users across desktop and mobile devices alike.
```

Reviewer: 'Powerful' is a badly overused word in web writing. Your readers will likely take this as hyperbole.

Author: I'm open to suggestions. Would "capable" work better?

Reviewer: If that's your choice. You also have 'compelling', 'impressive', and 'potent'.

Author: "capable" seemed best in this context, replaced.

let queue = Promise.resolve();

function schedule(op) {
  let res = queue.then(() => op(context));
  queue = res.catch(rethrowIfCritical);
  return res;
}
```

By chaining each operation in a `then()` callback of the existing `queue` promise, and storing the chained result as the new value of `queue`, I can make sure that all operations are executed one by one, in order and without overlaps.

Any operation errors are returned to the caller, while critical (unexpected) errors mark the entire chain as a rejected promise, and ensure that no new operation will be scheduled afterwards.

By keeping the module context in a private (non-exported) variable, I'm minimizing the risks of accessing the `context` by accident somewhere else in the app without going through the `schedule()` call.

To tie things together, now each access to the device context has to be wrapped in a `schedule()` call like this:

```js
let config = await this.connection.schedule((context) => context.configToJS());
```

and

```js
this.connection.schedule((context) => context.captureImageAsFile());
```

After that, all the operations were executing successfully without conflicts.

## Conclusion

> Feel free to browse the [codebase on Github](https://github.com/GoogleChromeLabs/web-gphoto2) for more implementation insights. I also want to thank [Marcus Meissner](https://github.com/msmeissn) for maintenance of gPhoto2 and for his reviews of my upstream PRs.

Author: @jpmedley note: added one small paragraph here because I was pointed out I don't have a direct link to the repo but it might be useful for other readers.
